All right let's talk about creating and extending
Abstract Classes. An abstract class is a class
that's declared with the abstract modifier and
it may or may not include abstract methods.
An abstract class, defers some or all of its
implementation to its subclasses, which is why
the abstract classes themselves cannot be instantiated.
An abstract class is used to define common
attributes and behaviour, for a set of classes that
will extend it. It's usually modelled
after an abstract concept, a type you would be unlikely
to create an instance of, but which could be
used to describe common features of a set of objects.
So I've showed several examples of an Animal class
which was extended by Dog for example.
The Animal class is a perfect candidate for
an abstract class because creating an
individual object of Animal is unlikely to happen
and yet you can identify many common attributes
across several types of animals
into the Animal Class as well as common behaviour
that any type of animal might have,
walk, bite, sit, play for example.
A class that is not abstract is called a concrete class.
Now the difference between using an abstract class
and a concrete class is that the abstract class
usually requires a subclass to implement its methods,
thereby forcing commonality of interface.
Now it's similar to an interface in this way,
but it also permits providing functionality that
subclasses might have in common, and that
you would just implement once on the abstract class.
The absolute minimum declaration of an abstract class
is shown below.
Abstract class, abstract class being the name
left and right curly braces.
Any method that is not implemented, I.e. has no
method body block, must be declared abstract.
Any class that has even one abstract method
must be declared abstract.
The reason is probably obvious but I'll state it anyway.
You would not want to create an object that
does not have it's behaviour implemented yet.
There is no such thing as an abstract field.
All right let's see how some of this stuff
works in code, I'm actually gonna create a
new class in our existing inheritance project and
call it vehicle.
(Clicking and typing sounds)
Okay so there's our vehicle class
so we're creating here an abstract class
as you can see by the definition on line nine
and this class will support a set of classes that
can be termed vehicle at the most general level
and which have a common set of attributes
and a common set of behaviours.
So you can see that the attributes are defined as
private, and there's also a constructor here that's
available to pass the data to the object.
There's an enum included, see that at the top of the
screen there and that defines some of the vehicle types.
The behaviour of the vehicles are defined by
a set of abstract methods,
down here as you can see on screen there
drive, park, and make noise.
All right so next we need to create another class
now we're gonna call this one Auto.
(Typing sounds)
The Auto class is a subclass of the
vehicle abstract class as you can see,
if you define a class as the subclass of an
abstract class, you must implement the abstract methods
which we do here, you can see the three methods that
we have implemented or if you don't do that you have to
declare the subclass as being abstract itself.
All right there's not really much else to say here,
we have a constructor there which actually calls the
other constructor as a pass through to the
vehicle constructor as you can see, then we've got
those other methods as I've mentioned and we've also
got a static method there which instantiates an
Auto object, and then we print out the values.
So let's actually run the code
and you can see the output on the screen down the bottom.
Now I said that if you don't implement all the
abstract methods from the parent class, you need to
make the subclass abstract as well.
So let's demonstrate this by creating another class,
so we're gonna call this one Automated Vehicle.
(Typing sounds)
So this is an abstract class that extends the
vehicle abstract class to support a special
subgroup of vehicles, those that are automated.
Now this class kind of hijacks the drive and park
methods on Vehicle, you can see this down here,
and it does that to force implementation of
newly defined also abstract methods,
autoDrive and autoParked.
And you can see how we've done that by
call to autoPark and autoDrive for the
park and drive methods but also we've made
autoPark and autoDrive abstract methods.
So in other words the calling programme will
still call drive, but any automated vehicle
will be forced to implement autoDrive and autoPark
instead of just drive and park.
So you can see that abstract methods and inheritance
support extensibility of the application.
So specifically as you can see there, the
class has declared two abstract methods
autoPark and autoDrive, and it's implemented
two of vehicle's three abstract methods park and drive
which I've just talked about, calling the
autoPark and autoDrive abstract methods from the
concrete methods.
All right so let's see this in action,
we need to create yet another class
so we're gonna call this one AutomatedAuto.
(Typing sounds)
Now this class should look familiar,
it's very similar to the Auto class we've talked about
earlier in the video, except the AutomatedAuto class
extends the AutomatedVehicle abstract class.
The autoDrive and autoPark methods are implemented
you can see there, you can see the main method
if I scroll down a bit more.
It's almost exactly the same, we're executing the
same calls drive and park but the AutomatedVehicle
class forces implementation of the autoDrive and
autoPark of any class that extends it.
All right so if we run this code now,
and there's the output on the screen down the bottom.
All right so in this video, we reviewed abstract classes
which are classes that will never get implemented,
but which can be used to force implementation,
of a standard set of behaviour by any subclass that
extends it.
So it allows calling classes to be knowledgeable
of only the abstract most general entity,
and use operations on it without knowledge of
the actual behaviour that will actually occur at runtime.
Now we've seen that if a derived class does not
implement all of the parent's abstract methods,
it must also be declared abstract, whether it
contains an additional abstract method or not.
I just wanna go over briefly now some rules here,
firstly any class that has an abstract method must be
declared abstract, any subclass must implement
all of the abstract class's abstract methods or
be declared abstract itself if it does not.
An abstract class does not actually have to
have any abstract methods, an abstract class can have
implemented methods of any type.
An abstract class can have attributes and other
inner types such as class, enum, and interface.
An abstract class cannot also be declared as final,
the two modifiers are mutually exclusive.
An abstract class cannot be declared as private because
no other class would be able to extend it.
An abstract method cannot be declared as private because
An abstract method cannot be static.
A static method cannot be overridden
so a static abstract method makes no sense.
And finally you cannot create an abstract constructor.
All right so let's end the video here and
in the next one we're gonna look at some
out of ordinary things that you might come across
when dealing with abstract classes.
See you in the next video.